---
title: "Animal Crossing New Horizons: An Island of Stability in an Unstable World"
date: 2021-02-28
series: revueBackup
---

It has been said before and will be said again (and again), but 2020 has been a
chaotic year for pretty much everyone. Some of the main themes of the year has
been uncertainty, instability and sudden, drastic change. Right as the first
wave of lockdowns and global fear about COVID-19 was starting to rise, Nintendo
released Animal Crossing New Horizons to the public after teasing it for years.
In this essay, I want to cover what I like about the game and how that made my
experience in lockdown easier.

As of writing this essay, I have 315 plus hours in Animal Crossing New Horizons.
I have fully maxxed out my home, acquired a few seasonal furniture sets and so
much more. It is a game that I go back to at least every few days.

Animal Crossing exists in its own category of games. It is a lifestyle
simulator, or a kind of game that simulates everyday life. In New Horizons you
are flown out to a deserted island and work on setting up a new life from
scratch. Time progresses in real human time. You can catch bugs and fish, dig up
fossils and acquire art from a shady businessman. These bugs, fish, fossils and
art can be sold, placed on your island (or in your home) or donated to the
museum in order to contribute to the cultural enrichment of your island.

As the year progresses, the seasons on your island change. Those changes alter
the appearance of your island and what resources your island offers. Spring
gives you sakura petals you can use to make spring furniture. Summer offers you
shells you can use to make your house like a beach. Fall gives you mushrooms,
acorns and leaves that give you a unique set of items. Winter gives you
snowflakes and snowfolk that you can get winter-themed recipes from. These
changes accent the base formula of the game.

You also make friends on the island. You start out with a few villagers randomly
picked from a pool of many. These friends start off not knowing you very well,
but as you talk you end up growing bonds through gifts, errands and living
together on a small remote island. You can get new villagers through random
island trips, visiting your friends in an airplane or randomly through your
island’s campsite.

One of the big additions to the game compared to other games in the series is
the crafting system. The crafting system unlocks an entirely new set of
furniture, tools, clothing, wallpapers, floor patterns and rugs for your home or
your island in general. You can unlock new things to build with DIY recipes that
you can find in balloons, in messages in bottles, from traveling NPC’s and from
your friends on the island.

In general though, Animal Crossing is a vibing simulator. You all just vibe on
the island and live together. It’s a very peaceful game. Things are stable.
There are no sudden drastic changes, no stress, no real enemies to defeat. It is
a very laid-back and self-directed game.

This game released at the end of March, 2020. COVID-19 had just started to
spread globally. In response, many governments started issuing orders to reduce
contact with friends and family in order to limit the spread of this deadly
disease. With so many people socially and physically isolated, a huge gap
emerged. New Horizons came out at the perfect time in order to give people
something to do. 

The week that New Horizons came out, my friend group became alive with activity.
Screenshot upon screenshot was posted. We formed a fruit cartel to distribute
items and foreign fruits to eachother. This group lasted for months. We worked
together and built up our islands to make them shine. 

Ironically, as COVID-19 separated us, we were brought closer together through
Animal Crossing. This same pattern showed up and was repeated all over the
internet, and the Nintendo Switch became and still is the most popular console
because of this. 

When I was a kid, the first Animal Crossing game came out for the Gamecube. It
was a very minimal game in comparison. You could collect furniture, harvest
fruit, catch bugs and fish, make new friends, and that’s about it. However it
was a blank canvas to create things upon. A lot of the game’s details (such as
where villager houses would go) were managed by an RNG. This left you as a sort
of guest in the village. However, the game offered a lot regardless. There’s
still an active speedrunning community for Animal Crossing! 

However my experimentation into self-expression via Animal Crossing was limited
then, and not just by the in-game tools. This was a home console game, and my
family shared the Gamecube between multiple people. Animal Crossing also took up
59 blocks of storage on a memory card, which was the entire storage capacity for
the base, most cheap memory card. 

Then the Nintendo DS came out, and after a year or two Animal Crossing: Wild
World came out for it. The Nintendo DS was revolutionary because it was a fully
portable console. Having Animal Crossing on it means that I could do whatever I
wanted in private without people easily discovering it and judging. 

Around this time, I was also starting to explore my gender. I started out
playing the game with a male character, but after I got an action replay I was
experimenting with codes and found one to change your character’s gender from
male to female. I ended up liking it that way, but I couldn’t place why. Years
later I realized this was the first time that I was actually figuring out that I
didn’t identify with the gender I was born into. Without Animal Crossing I would
have probably gone down a far different life path filled with denial and
self-loathing. 

<xeblog-conv name="Cadey" mood="enby">Hacking the game to change your gender is
kinda metal though.</xeblog-conv> 

New Horizons is the first game in the series since Wild World that really stuck
to me. I’ve tried to go back and play Wild World again, but it’s not really
stuck to me like it did when I was a kid. It just doesn’t feel the same. 

My island is named Ma Ilo (toki pona for tool place). I have been working on
making it my place of refuge. In order to get a five star rating on your island,
you need to coat your island to the gills in stuff and maintain that rating for
two weeks. I don’t like how that looks, so I don’t go for that. 

Right now one of the bigger projects I’m working on is setting up a chapel-type
place. I hope to use this chapel as a part of the socially distant reception
that a close group of friends and I would use to celebrate my marriage, when it
happens. Me and my fiance’s wedding plans were put into shambles as a result of
the lockdowns. I don’t know if this chapel would be fully put into use as a part
our future plans, however it would make for a useful island feature in the
future. A large meeting room can only be useful in the long run. 

In conclusion, Animal Crossing New Horizons is my 2020 game of the year. It is a
very calm game. It contrasts against the drastic drama and chaos of 2020. It
helps me keep perspective in the face of so much danger and pain. Animal
Crossing came out at the perfect time and has given me an island of stability
among all of the unstability that 2020 has brought. It should have won game of
the year at the Game Awards (or should I say The Last Of Us: Part 2 awards), but
I can understand why it didn’t. 

If you have a Nintendo Switch, pick up Animal Crossing for it if you want your
own island of stability. 
