---
title: "The birdsong persists"
date: 2022-11-13
series: twitter
tags:
 - prose
---

<xeblog-hero ai="Waifu Diffusion v1.3 (float16)" file="birds-free" prompt="blue birds, trees, flock, teyvat, sunrise, flying, thick outlines"></xeblog-hero>

In the days before, there were many roosts for the itinerant birds of the ether.
Flocks of birds flittered about between roosts, but never really settled on one
in particular for very long. This continued for generations, the birds just
understood the roosts being temporary as an immutable fact of their existence.

Then a bird decided to build a new roost. A roost that could house _everyone_.
With a bright and proud announcement, that bird proclaimed thus:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">just setting up my twttr</p>&mdash; jack (@jack) <a href="https://twitter.com/jack/status/20?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March 21, 2006</a></blockquote>

Birds flocked to the new roost and everyone started to sing and tweet to
eachother. This filled that small initial roost quickly. Birds were joining
faster than the roost could be built, but they stuffed themselves in anyways.
Eventually the icon of failure had been purged and the birdsong was able to
thrive on that roost.

The roost became a massive hub in that network of itinerant roosts. As the roost
grew, the other roosts it replaced started to feel depopulated and withered.
Others lost interest and joined in the main roost.

The roost continued to grow at the expense of all the others. It kept growing
and consuming more and more flocks. Those flocks started to lose their identity
of their previous roosts and started to see themselves as _belonging_ in the big
roost.

With so much birdsong, you would think that the roost would be invincible. It
was not. It was in dire straits. The constant building and maintenance had a
cost that was only realized when things were almost falling apart. Somehow they
had managed to avoid the cracks showing on the outside, but things were
incredibly dire.

They made a deal with the devil during a point of contention between the flocks.
The roost thrived, but at a huge cost. The previously united flock had been
divided into groups that wanted to destroy eachother. The roost continued, but
the flocks started to grow bitter.

Then came the idealist. The idealist proposed to buy the roost from its former
owners and reshape it into his vision. The idealist saw the vision and agreed
before seeing the cracks in the roost's core. But it was too late. The idealist
was now the owner of the roost. To an even worse result than the deal with the
devil.

With the caretakers of the roost fleeing to the winds, the cracks became more
and more visible. First they were notable, then they were unignorable, then they
were threatening to the flocks. The whole roost was unstable and the birdsong
started to change its tune until it was almost entirely against the idealist and
his flawed visions.

More flocks fled the roost in fear that it will collapse out from under them.
Their happy birdsong left with them, leaving the anger against the idealist to
dominate the roost so much that it became a poison.

The flocks did not flee to another single roost though. They had learned that
lesson. On the side a flock had been building tools to let flocks create their
own roosts. But, at the same time they also made those roosts able to
communicate with eachother. This means that the flocks could flee the main
roost, but still be able to hear eachother's birdsong. There were thousands of
roosts instead of one big one.

As wave after wave of flocks fled the roost, each of the other roosts found
themselves with more and more friends. The birds sang in harmony forever on.
Still welcoming those fleeing the failing roost to this day.
