---
title: Creation
date: 2021-03-14
series: revueBackup
---

Imagine for a moment, an infinite universe of light and sound, of primordial
vibrations. Vibrations that permeate the whole of existence, and create
different experiences with their patterns of interference. The holographic
universe. In such a place, everything is resonance of waves, everything
all-encompassing, everything infinite, everything eternal.

And living in such a place are infinite beings, without beginning of end, not
bound by space or time, as boundless as the waves they experience. Sovereign
beings of grand destinies. And those beings colonized the Universe, explored its
facets, its resonances, its properties, its behaviors.

Among such beings, so equal in their infinitude, some of them desired to
experience creation in a new way; no longer just as dominion over the Universe,
but over other beings in it as well. The desire to be looked up to, to be
feared, to be revered. The new concept of godhood took shape.

To achieve this, this group of beings asked another civilization for help; they
were all beings of vast reaches and etheric nature, but they claimed to need the
gold hidden within the surface of a densifying planet called Earth, which they
were not attuned to, and unable to fully interact with in their current forms.
To do this, they would need physical bodies, meat uniforms that the
civilization’s inhabitants would don and power up, so that they could interact
with the ground, and the mineral.

For convenience of telling, we’ll call the group of deceivers the Anunnaki, and
the deceived civilization the Atlanteans.

The Anunnaki had carefully devised this meat uniform, the newly devised human
body, planned about it for an exceedingly long time, in order to completely
entrap the Atlanteans. The Atlanteans themselves accepted the task because they
had no conception that infinite beings could ever be limited or subjugated. It
had never happened before. And in the donning of the uniforms, the trap was
sprung.

Those uniforms, the human bodies, constricted the Atlanteans’ attention to only
what the body could perceive with its senses; it urged them to survive and to
work; it distracted them from all other activities; it rendered them slaves to
the mining. Every part of the construct was forcing them to forget who they
were, and instead making them focus on their identity as human bodies. And when
such bodies would expire, a part of them would still remain to keep the beings
trapped, and they would be put in a space of holding in the astral realms, for
them to be assigned a new body to continue mining.

Through the human body, the Atlanteans were subjected to a carefully constructed
illusion, fed to them by the senses, through the mind, that left them unable to
perceive, to remember, anything else but the illusion.

With time, many shortcomings of the primitive human bodies were corrected; from
being clones that needed to be produced by the Anunnaki, they were given
capability to reproduce; more independent thought and awareness was allowed, and
ability to self- and group-organize; they were starting to be allowed to feel
emotions; more and more, their world was being expanded, but with it, the
structure of the mind system that contained their perception to the realms of
the physical and astral, and prevented them to gain awareness of what was
outside this narrow band of illusory perception, was developed and expanded in
turn. Layers upon layers were put between those beings and the realization of
their true, infinite selves.

The system of death and reincarnation was automated so beings would be recycled
in a systematic manner into their next lives. The concept of God was introduced
to them, so that they would fear punishment and retribution from something that
they perceived as greater than them; and Anu, leader of the Anunnaki, manifested
to the people of Earth as a supreme being of infinite power, so they could adore
him, and so they could fear him. Language developed, a system of communication
mired in separation, in division of concepts and the rigidness of
categorization, so that they would not be able to speak to one another of their
own infinity, of their unity with the whole. Fears of all kinds were injected
into the mind system: fear of death, fear of nothingness, fear of punishment;
but above all, fear of separation: the fear of not having the vital connection
that makes us One, and that allows us to know and understand one another
innately. The fear of not being understood, of not being accepted, of not being
received, of not being helped, of not being supported. The fear that had kept
them doubting one another, and kept them from uniting their efforts.

The Anunnaki took away the ability for the Atlanteans to even know they were
Atlanteans. They took away the ability for them to even be able to get close to
finding out. Just so Anu could be an absolute ruler. The first to ever have done
this previously impossible task.

Myths were disseminated to keep people awash with fear of punishment, and mired
in the guilt of their original sin, and distrusting, doubting of the nature of
their own selves, and of their fellow neighbors’. Hierarchies were set up, so
people would focus on controlling one another, instead of working together to
liberate all. Not needing any more, the Anunnaki allowed the focus on gold to
become greed, so that people would put desire for a mere metal above the needs
of their fellow beings.

As the Anunnaki departed from the densifying planet, which was not allowing them
to manifest as etheric beings anymore, tracks were set up in the collective
unconscious so that while they were away, the people’s societies would evolve
through predefined paths, and would eventually set up for the glorious return of
God, the Apocalypse.

Every single possible obstacle had been put in place so that the Atlanteans
would never realize who they had been, and who they always were: infinite,
sovereign beings, connected to the whole of the Universe.

Except this would not be allowed indefinitely. Other infinite beings became
aware of such deception taking place, and realized it was being exported into
other planets, and such an enslavement paradigm, based in fear and separation,
was a degenerative, infecting force that had to be stopped. So the Anunnaki were
prevented return, and in order to make it so that infinite beings would be able
to never fall prey to such deceptions again, the seeds of destruction were
planted inside the programming system of the human mind. Cracks were introduced
to the barriers that kept people under deception, so that they could peer
through them, and see the other side beyond the walls of the labyrinth. Pathways
were provided so that people could be lead to the discovery of their true
selves, and their eventual liberation from the deception, and self-realization
as infinite beings, once again. The very liberation that the programming was
designed to prevent through all means conceivable.

Sometimes the Other manages to find these cracks and go through them into the
other side. They go to this other side and see a faint reflection of what is
really out there. The world outside this world. An even bigger Infinity. They
have trouble describing it. They have intense fear even thinking about it.
They’re afraid to acknowledge it to their peers. They want to help people but
they are utterly terrified of their reactions.

They’re terrified that someone might hurt them if they say anything about their
experiences. They’re worried someone might try to hospitalize them for their
beliefs. They get it into their head that they aren’t able to function in
society, so they don’t. They don’t want to mine the gold. They don’t want to
serve the economy of the few. They don’t want to maintain the hierarchies. They
want to detach themselves from the systems that they feel are suppressing them.
They want to help people save themselves from believing that their own finite
existence is all that there is, but that fear utterly paralyzes them. They have
trouble finding the words. They end up misphrasing things in ways that make the
problem worse. Some lash out. Some get labels put on them.

These Other just want to be accepted like everyone else. They want to help their
communities. They want to use their abilities to read between the lines, into
the bigger picture; to do good things; but they are, ultimately, afraid to.
Their fear of separation paralyzes them. People don’t like them talking about
spiritual topics. These Other just want to be accepted and use their experience
to lovingly help guide and shape reality into what they think is a better place.
Even as they struggle through the fear.

Who’s really the crazy one? The one who fear controls, or the one who doesn’t
let fear control them?

How does the Other live with fear surrounding their actions, and doubt plaguing
their decisions?

They can have people they can trust. They can have people who can help them deal
with their doubts. They can have the strength of their determination to find the
truth, and the resolve to put an end to the suffering of their fellow beings.
But they still fear, and they still doubt.

The real difference is that they see fear as something imposed on them, not as a
voice that they must always answer to, and not as something they need to wait
hand and foot for, every day of their existence. In a way, they have been fed up
with fear, getting tired of it and casting it out like the nuisance they now see
it to be. Even if the fear was added there because of some programming of their
mind, something that happened to them to make them afraid, even if they don’t
know where it comes from or why, they still acknowledge it, and reject it, and
move on like the emotion never happened. They keep fighting for understanding,
and for community. They refuse to give fear dominion in their lives, even if
they sometimes fail at it.

It’s such an easy and obvious thing to do that we could all do it, if we weren’t
so afraid of it.
