---
title: Hands
date: 2023-02-18
tags:
 - personal
 - RSI
---

As a computer scientist, one of the most vital tools that I have is my
hands. I have been taking horrible care of them. Your hands are one of
the most valuable tools you have. Do not squander them. I am writing
this post with dictation, please forgive that this will feel slightly
ranty.

<xeblog-hero ai="Counterfeit" file="starbucks-hacker" prompt="1girl, laptop, starbucks, typing, black hoodie, brown hair, brown eyes, long hair, tears, airpods"></xeblog-hero>

I want to assert that I am OK, I am getting help, I am doing stretches
and I am attempting to take care of my body the best that I can. One
of the really hard things is to avoid just feeling guilty about this.
The deep seated feeling of guilt just fucks with you.

Don't neglect your stretches. Don't neglect exercise. Don't neglect
your body. It is the only body that you get.

I really wish I had something more positive to say here, I am hopeful
that things will be OK. I am going to make adjustments in how I do
things, so that I can preserve my function and give my hands a break.
Don't worry about me. I will be fine.

I am very lucky that my hand pain is fairly minimal. I have been told
that my Ergonomics Month perfect. I just have not been stretching.
This has been a mistake. It is very hard to live to my ideals of not
regretting things when something happens that is so easy to regret. I
will survive. I will become stronger. I will be OK.

I will not likely be streaming as much this year, or for as long as I
have in previous times. Those giant four hour marathon streams are
probably not the best thing for my health at this point. Right now I
stream every other week, and I'm probably going to move it to once a
month.

Take. Care. Of. Your. Body. 

Seriously, do it. Don't make the same mistake that I have.

At this point I feel compelled to apologize somehow; I am still trying
to understand why I feel this compulsion (it might be because I'm
actually a bit more Canadian than I thought). It is an occupational
hazard. I knew that it was a matter of time until this became an issue
again.

Nothing to it but to do it at this point.
