---
title: "My Thoughts on Paper Mario and the Origami King"
date: 2021-01-30
series: revueBackup
tags:
 - link
---

NOTE: there are spoilers here, read at your own risk.

Paper Mario is a game series that is near and dear to my heart. I grew up
playing The Thousand Year Door on the Gamecube and was never quite able to beat
the final boss. However, I loved that game. I put hours into it. The RPG
mechanics added up and made the game enjoyable and replayable.

The series started going away from its RPG roots in the Wii era with the release
of Super Paper Mario. One of the things that really stood out about The Thousand
Year Door though was the partner system. These partners that Mario picked up
over his adventure were directly impactful to the game world and story. You were
stuck behind a cracked wall until you got the bomb-omb partner. You were given a
Yoshi egg and got to nurture, hatch, and even name the Yoshi that joined your
party. All on top of the backdrop of the adventure.

Super Paper Mario gutted the battle and partner systems. Instead of partners
being an integral part of the story, they acted like talking items that let you
do the things that partners did. Combined with no turn based battling meant that
a lot of the reason I played the game vanished. I played Super Paper Mario once
and probably will never replay it again.

Sticker Star was worse. It did bring back the battle system, but the core of it
was severely gutted. One of the core attack mechanics for Paper Mario games is
that you have basic jump and hammer attacks, and everything builds out from
there. Sticker Star made these basic attacks into single-use consumable items
that you can (and will) run out of. Fighting enemies becomes pointless.
Exploration in the overworld became pointless because enemies started blocking
away the paths I thought were interesting.

Color Splash was also a thing, but I never played it so I can’t say anything
more than what I have picked up from reviews. It had the same basic faults.

Origami King brings back unlimited basic attacks, but it also gutted most of the
interesting parts of the story. You do have some itenerant partners, but a lot
of the magic came from them being a core part of your adventure from the
beginning. This is not the case. There are some more emotionally powerful
moments (namely Bobby’s sacrifice), but they are one-offs that don’t really
happen more than once. Also a lot of toads. Like dear god there are so many
toads everywhere.

The battle system is also kind of a pain that adds up over time. The core idea
is that the battles take place in a stadium and Mario is center stage. There’s
rings that enemies stand on top of and there’s a puzzle solving element to
lining them up and getting action/damage bonuses. If you solve the puzzle, you
can usually clear out all of the enemies in a single turn. If you don’t want to
solve the puzzle, there’s always capitalism! Pay the toads you’ve saved up to
999 coins and they’ll solve the whole puzzle for you, heal you and sometimes
give you an item too.

Overall I didn’t end up liking the battle system and found it annoying to the
point I’d pay my way out of solving the puzzles most of the time.

A lot of the characters are really samey too, it’s almost like the people making
the game weren’t allowed to really create any new and unique characters inside
the world or any new kinds of characters at all. Turns out this was exactly the
case (I still don’t know how they got away with the Vellumentals).

> Kensuke Tanabe: Since Paper Mario: Sticker Star, it’s no longer possible to
> modify Mario characters or to create original characters that touch on the
> Mario universe. That means that if we aren’t using Mario characters for
> bosses, we need to create original characters with designs that don’t involve
> the Mario universe at all, like we’ve done with Olly and the stationery
> bosses.

Oh yeah, the bosses in Origami King are stationary. They have some of the most
unique personalities (like a disco dancing hole punch) but it can get kind of
surreal in a way that pulls you out of flow. The boss battles are fought by
making Mario make his way to the center of the stadium using arrows on the
rings. These also get annoying.

There are a few moments where you don’t fight bosses directly, but instead you
have to survive bullet hell sequences where you need to jump away from attacks
and hammer the boss to death. Those were fun, but still this wasn’t really a
Paper Mario thing to do.

Overall, if I had never played a Paper Mario game before, I’d probably think
this was a very good if not excellent game. This game had paper and Mario, but
to me it was not really a Paper Mario game. I can’t recommend it to people that
liked the early games in the series.

6/10, was a functional game with tight controls and didn’t crash.
