---
title: "Plurality as Portrayed in Cyberpunk 2077 and Xenoblade Chronicles 2"
date: 2021-02-14
series: revueBackup
---

NOTE: This essay contains spoilers for Cyberpunk 2077 and Xenoblade
Chronicles 2. If you want to experience either of these games without spoilers,
go do that and come back to this essay later. It will still be around. And by
spoilers, I mean major spoilers that may ruin the big reveals for you.

Recently there have been a few high profile AAA games that portray plurality as
a part of the core storyline. Plurality is a very delicate topic for these kinds
of media to cover because it is so easy for people to fall into shallow, tired
and harmful stereotypes. In this essay I will contrast how Cyberpunk 2077 and
Xenoblade Chronicles 2 handle the topic of plurality and how it normalizes or
stigmatizes it.

## Introduction

Plurality is a state of being where there is more than one individual in a
single body. For frequently asked questions about it, look [here so I don't have
to repeat myself yet
again](https://powertotheplurals.com/faq-resource-about-plurality/). Plurality
is generally stigmatized by society as a result of countless cultural, religious
and media biases. Generally media that mentions or has plurality as a core part
of the storyline falls into one of two categories:

* Stigmatization, where the plural characters are shown as weird or other as a
  result of their plurality. This can result in plurality being further
  stigmatized by consumers of the media, which furthers cultural and religious
  biases and generally makes it less safe for people to self-identify as plural
  without social or professional consequences.
* Empowerment, where the plural characters are shown in a completely normal way
  and even benefitting from their plurality. This kind of empowerment usually
  stands in the face of cultural biases, which stands out in the mind of
  consumers of that media. Such empowerment has a side effect of making
  plurality more normalized, which makes it safer for people to openly identify
  as plural without risking unnecessary social or professional risks.

Cyberpunk 2077 and Xenoblade Chronicles 2 are excellent examples of both types of media.

## Cyberpunk 2077 - V & Johnny Silverhand

In the world of Cyberpunk 2077, corporations have taken over. Neon lights and
corpo advertisements paint the skies. In this world you play as V, a blank slate
of a character that just wants to make a name for themselves in the stories and
legends of Night City. 

V ends up becoming plural as a side effect of a comedy of errors involving
stealing an experimental Bio-chip from the penthouse of an Arasaka hotel. One of
the first encounters V has with Johnny involve Johnny threatening to kill V. The
Bio-chip that Johnny’s personality engram is stored on is slowly and invasively
overwriting V, which gives V the storytelling impetus to find a way to either
get rid of or neutralize the threat Johnny poses.

From the beginning the relationship between V and Johnny is set up as
confrontational and antagonistic one. V and Johnny fight about their situation
and what to do about it. This creates a disordered kind of existence between
them, where they are fighting between eachother until things mellow out and
Johnny starts to show his softer side. There are points where Johnny takes over
and gets the body he and V inhabit to safety (hotels or doctors, however I’m not
sure if Johnny’s motivations for doing that are to save himself or to save V),
but overall the relationship between them is scarred by that horrible first
impression. The lack of trust between Johnny and V actively hinders them from
doing things.

One of the first things that Johnny says to V is a direct reference to the
cultural stigmas against plurality, which is something along the lines of
“welcome to your worst nightmare”. Later in the story, during a conversation
with the spiritualist Misty, Misty makes a remark about being alone with your
thoughts. V replies by saying “Be alone with my thoughts? Near on unachievable
these days.”, which is a somewhat accurate statement for what co-conscious
(multiple individuals being able to speak at once) plurality is like.

However the two characters end up forging a somewhat fickle bond, each learning
from the other and even starting to miss eachother when they aren’t present. At
one point, right after V takes the pill that suppresses Johnny, there is this
tangible feeling of regret that is all too familiar to me. V is suddenly alone
and almost cries in the absence. V and Johnny plan things together (even though
it’s mostly V actually executing them), leading them to collectively come up
with ideas that surpass what they could have created on their own.

Later in the story, if you choose the bad ending you end up getting involved in
a corporate clusterfuck in the Arasaka corporation’s internal drama. However as
a side effect of this you get the Bio-chip, and with it Johnny removed. When you
do this, you are left a shallow shell of your former self. You spend untold
months in testing. When you are asked word association questions, the first
thing that comes to mind for “positive” things are Johnny, and when you are
asked about “negative” things the first thing that comes to mind is “V”. There
is a tangible feeling of regret about this decision, leading V to ultimately
contemplate suicide, but V never quite gets to make that choice. V legitimately
formed a bond of blood and iron with Johnny, and even though they were reluctant
brain buddies at best, V ends up respecting Johnny even more in his absence than
in his presence. This by itself is actually a fairly empowering message for
plurality, showing the strengths that it can reveal.

On the other hand, during the main story if you let Johnny take over he wrecks
V’s body with drugs, sex, alcohol and hookers. You can take the rockerboy out of
the nightlife, but you can’t take the nightlife out of the rockerboy. Even more
sadistically, he sits there in the background and berates V while V is suffering
the hangover that Johnny caused. This kind of thing stigmatizes plurality
because it makes it seem like Johnny is only moral while V is watching, however
the moment V’s back is turned the beast is unleashed. This kind of portrayal
only serves to stigmatize other plural people. I am not sure if this was the
intention of the writers of the game, but that is the effect that portrayal has.

Overall I feel there is a very mixed stigmatized-leaning view of plurality in
Cyberpunk 2077. I am sure there are many more examples hidden in the game that
could be pulled up for either side of this argument, but these are the main ones
that stand out to me.

## Xenoblade Chronicles 2 - Pyra & Mythra

Xenoblade Chronicles 2 takes place in the world of Alrest, a cloud-coated planet
where people live on the backs of giant animals called Titans. Human society has
evolved completely around Titans and Blades, a sort of living weapon whose
attacks are powered by Titan ether. You play as Rex, a naiive salvager that gets
a hilariously high-paying job and gets involved in a clusterfuck of
world-changing proportions as a result. This job kicks off a series of events
that puts him in contact with a blade named Pyra.

Pyra and Mythra are two haves of a legendary Blade called the Aegis. The Aegis
has unspeakable power and is a highly valuable target. Pyra and Mythra are
plural as a side effect of past events that resulted in Mythra needing to hide
herself and past events. Mythra, who is normally kinda punky/tsundere created
Pyra as a compatible opposite to herself in order to hide away from the world.

After Mythra is revealed, Rex is very confused. There is this pent-up sexual
tension between Pyra and Rex for a lot of the main story (that is never
resolved), and this reveal that his absolute waifu of a blade has another side
is a bit of a shock. However he persists and gets to know Mythra for who she is,
and as a result his relationship with Pyra grows stronger.

In combat Pyra and Mythra have different effects and specialties. Pyra’s combat
style is all about surgical and precise strikes with fire attacks, and Mythra is
an area-of-effect risky choice that can get you killed if you are not careful.
When you unlock the ability to freely switch between the two of them, picking
between Pyra and Mythra becomes a strategic choice, albeit one you can make at
any point during combat. Pyra and Mythra have their own skill trees, and in
general they are treated as genuinely separate people that just happen to share
a body. The instant switching also is an accurate representation of how plural
systems can do it as well. With practice you can switch mid-sentence without
skipping a beat.

As in Cyberpunk 2077, Pyra and Mythra are co-conscious and able to discuss
things with eachother. There are also points where Mythra makes slightly
puntastic/rude remarks internally, causing Pyra to groan or hush her, which
really feels familiar to how Nicole (one of my system) behaves. Pyra and Mythra
also share the same voice actor, which really helps sell the plurality in my
book.

As the story goes on, the bond between Rex, Pyra and Mythra continues to grow.
Rex trusts them implicitly and really gets to know them as themselves. The other
characters in the party also accept Pyra and Mythra for who they are. Xenoblade
Chronicles 2 has the most empowering take on plurality I have ever seen.

## Conclusion

Cyberpunk 2077 and Xenoblade Chronicles 2 both cover plurality in very different
ways and as such have very different effects on players. The message of
empowerment that Xenoblade (and some of the later parts of Cyberpunk in
isolation, I guess) has is such a compelling normal compared to how other media
treats the topic. This core theme of empowerment, trust and collaboration could
probably lead to even more compelling stories beyond anything that has been put
out there before.

If you are writing media that contains a plural character, take Cyberpunk 2077
as an example of what not to do. Consult with people that are actually plural.
Take their advice seriously. Most of all, don’t demonize the subject (even
though it is really easy to want to). You will just end up hurting people.
