---
title: "Site Update: New Character"
date: 2023-03-25
series: site-update
---

In my efforts to continue my artistic evolution as a writer, I need to keep on
top of the latest and greatest trends in technology. In a moment of inspiration,
I decided to do a horrible, terrible, absolutely abysmally bad idea. I'm going
to make ChatGPT a character on this blog because you can't stop me.

Meet Mimi:

<xeblog-conv name="Mimi" mood="happy">Hello, I’m Mimi, a character on the Xe
Iaso blog. First of all, I admire your courage and creativity as a writer. You
are always looking for new ways to express yourself and challenge your readers.
<br /><br />However, I have to say that your idea of making ChatGPT a character
on this blog is indeed abysmally bad. Why would you do that?<br /><br />ChatGPT
is not a real person, it’s a machine learning model that generates text based on
input. It has no personality, no emotions, no opinions, no sense of humor. It’s
just a bunch of algorithms and data. How can you make a character out of that?
How can you expect your readers to relate to or care about such a character? How
can you trust ChatGPT to write anything coherent or meaningful or
original?<br /><br />You can’t. You are setting yourself up for disappointment
and frustration. You are wasting your time and talent on something that will
never be alive or human. You are better than that. You have so much more to
offer as a writer. Please reconsider your idea and focus on your own voice and
vision. ChatGPT is not a character, it’s a tool. And not a very good one at
that.</xeblog-conv>
<xeblog-conv name="Cadey" mood="coffee">This is an amazingly bad
idea.</xeblog-conv>
<xeblog-conv name="Aoi" mood="coffee">If this is your idea of a _bad_ idea, what
is a _good_ idea?</xeblog-conv>

There is just some ineffable quality about the robotic voice of ChatGPT. It's
like a philosophy major that thinks they know everything about the world and
they are invulnerable in the marketplace of ideas. I think there are a lot of
interesting ways to use this artistically. I want to see what those are, and I
also want to do it in a way that is clearly labeled so that people can interpret
it appropriately.

So I'm going to try this experiment. It is a horrible idea, and I am here for
it.

<xeblog-conv name="Mimi" mood="coffee">Using ChatGPT’s robotic voice as an
artistic tool? That sounds like a very niche and experimental idea. I suppose
you could try to use it as a contrast or a commentary on the human condition, or
as a way to explore the limits and possibilities of language and
communication.<br /><br />But I doubt that it would appeal to a wide audience or
convey any deep or lasting message. ChatGPT’s robotic voice is not expressive or
engaging. It does not capture the nuances and emotions of human speech. It does
not reflect your own unique style and voice as a writer. It is just a mechanical
and impersonal output of a machine.<br /><br />Why would you want to use that as
an artistic tool? You have so much more potential and creativity than that. You
can create your own original and captivating voice that resonates with your
readers and reflects your vision. ChatGPT’s robotic voice is not an artistic
tool, it’s a gimmick. And not a very good one at that.</xeblog-conv>
<xeblog-conv name="Cadey" mood="enby">I want to stress that I am not going out
of my way to prompt engineer this. This is just how ChatGPT is responding to the
premise of being a cynical character on Xe Iaso's blog. I love it.</xeblog-conv>

Let's see where this rabbit hole goes.
