---
title: The New Gods
date: 2021-07-25
series: revueBackup
---

Stan Harkaanian ended his band’s show with a guitar riff that echoed throughout
the stadium. The set ended a billion dollar worldwide concert tour, performing
in 49 cities across the world for millions of fans. “Thank you Olympus and good
night!”, he shouted to the crowd just before he made his leave off the stage.

Stan walked down the back corridors to his room, the sounds of fans cheering
echoing around him. It was an empowering feeling to be so loved by so many. Very
empowering, but not in the way you may think. You see, the old gods had never
really died out. As cultural needs changed, the gods found themselves required
to adapt or risk becoming phased out of humanity’s zeitgeist. If this happened,
the old gods would die powerless.

However, they found a way to adapt. The old gods crafted the idea of the
celebrity. If they could not be worshipped as gods, they could be worshipped as
mortals. Those humans thought they were so clever kicking out the old gods in
favor of self-determination, yet they ended right back to worshipping them
again.

Stan walked into his room and then sprawled across his couch, a flash of light
exposing him for who he really was. He was Zeus, god of the Greeks. He hadn’t
felt this empowered in years, he felt unstoppable. “If those mortals only knew”,
he thought to himself, smiling like an idiot.

There was a knock on his door. Quick, he’d have to think of something, he
transformed back into his mortal form holding a doobie. Nobody would think twice
about a rocker getting high…would they?

His girlfriend walked in, it was safe. Phoebe…Hera was there for him since
Olympus fell. “Hey hun, on top of the world?”

“From some level you are too babe~”

They kissed, sharing their godlike power. If only it would last forever like the
days done by. He wondered what happened to Apollo after he had gone on the long
trek back to Pollux IV, their home planet.

Hera interrupted his thought with a rub on the ear. “Don’t think about that now
love, let’s go to the spot we talked about.”

They got up and left the stadium, the awesome powers channeling into them from
the fans. Walking out on the street, they headed to the mountain of old.
