---
title: "You don't want Twitter to be a free speech zone"
date: 2022-10-24
tags:
 - twitter
 - elon
 - mastodon
 - fediverse
 - noxp
---

<xeblog-hero ai="Waifu Diffusion v1.3" file="fire-in-the-starbucks" prompt="starbucks, coffee shop, lo-fi hip hop, cozy, on fire, fire, burning, fire everywhere, absurd res"></xeblog-hero>

Every so often I get another update about the Elon Musk buying Twitter saga and
every so often I get this unspecified feeling of dread for the future where that
purchase goes through. Among the things that I've seen, the biggest thing that
worries me is the idea that Elon Musk wants to turn Twitter into a "free speech
zone". In terms of red flags being raised, this should be the biggest, reddest
flag ever raised in the history of social media.

If this happens and Twitter is made into a "free speech zone", I am going to
drastically lessen my use of it in favor of more ethical social media protocols
like [the Fediverse](https://fediverse.party/). I really hope this is an "if"
problem and not a "when" problem, but I'm getting the feeling that it's a "when"
problem. You can follow me on Mastodon or another ActivityPub server (such as
Pleroma or Pixelfed) at [@cadey@pony.social](https://pony.social/@cadey). If
Twitter really does fall, you probably should [get on Mastodon
too](https://instances.social/list).

## Why "free speech zones" are bad

If you have also been raised in the USA, you may wonder why something being a
"free speech zone" is bad at all. One of the prevailing myths in American
culture is that the US is exceptional because of government freedoms like the
freedom of speech. Over time some people have made drastic misunderstandings of
this part of the Bill of Rights to the US Constitution:

> Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
> prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or
> of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to
> petition the government for a redress of grievances.

<xeblog-conv name="Cadey" mood="coffee">This should not be shocking, but I am
not a lawyer. This is my own understanding based on lived experience being one
of the few people that actually paid attention to my US government
class.</xeblog-conv>

This says that _Congress_ (the legislative branch of the US government) cannot
place limits on the freedom of speech. Somehow this has been construed to mean
that _Twitter_, _Facebook_, _YouTube_, and _other private companies_ cannot
place limits on what can be said on their platforms. The reasons for why they do
this have some intriguing misunderstandings of the concept of the "public
square" (not a legal concept as far as I understand) and largely boil down to
circular logic. If you stand on top of a cardboard box in a public square to
speak something objectionable, people can tell you to shut up if you are making
a disturbance. The police can force you to stop under threat of violence
(financial or physical) if they determine you are making a disturbance.

A "free speech zone" would not be able to make someone shut up. This is how you
create behaviour that threatens people like me. This isn't something I bring up
on my blog much (I'd much rather you judge me based on the things I create
rather than something about me I didn't ask for), but I am a nonbinary
transgender person. For choosing to self-actualize and live as my true self, I
get bullied and harassed (amusingly enough, I get both the level of shit that
men are given and the level of shit that women are given). Here is a recent
example:

> Subject: you are annoying
> 
> And unloveable
> 
> You can never escape your real identity with gay cartoons

<xeblog-conv name="Cadey" mood="coffee">Amusingly enough this person followed up
to this email with "Just to be clear that wasn't transphobic (I am enby) I just
think you know you're annoying and unfunny shark cartoons won't help", as if
internalized transphobia is not a thing that exists. Internalized transphobia is
a bitch and a half to deal with, but I've found it worth my time to fully
dissect those feelings and then dismiss them properly.</xeblog-conv>

It really doesn't help that most of the examples of "free speech zones" are
websites where people just want to spam the n-word without a moderator stopping
them. When I moderated IRC servers sometimes people would just have this rabid
affinity for spamming the n-word and when asked to stop they would get very
angry because I was impinging on their "right to free speech". 

There are also politicians in my country of citizenship that want to make [my
existence anywhere near children a sex offense at the federal
level](https://mikejohnson.house.gov/uploadedfiles/johnla_083_xml.pdf).

If things are this bad _with_ moderation in the picture, imagine how bad things
will be when moderation is _out of_ the picture. That is the true horror of
"free speech zones". They do not have rules. They do not have limits. They will
self-select for the worst of the worst and that's how you get sites that make
things like 4chan look like a civilized discussion room.

This is how you scare people like me away from the public sphere entirely. If
you support "free speech zones", you cannot then go around and say that you
support the LGBTQ+ community. Those are diametrically opposed statements. I
should not have to be brave. I should be able to be safe. If you are a _true_
supporter of free speech, you should be working to help change things such that
both "free speech zones" and radical self-censorship are not needed.

<xeblog-conv name="Cadey" mood="coffee">God the comments on this one are going
to be horrible.</xeblog-conv>

---

Now in this article is where my writing classes tell me I should add some sort
of conclusion, resolution, or other kind of "wrapping it up" sentiment to the
article. This usually involves making your closing arguments in some kind of
conclusion and suggesting a remediation or an alternate path that people could
take to avoid the core problem of "free speech zones" entirely. Maybe actually
moderating things properly would help, but then you have [the problem where the
people doing content moderation have horrible mental health
issues](https://www.theverge.com/interface/2020/5/13/21255994/facebook-content-moderator-lawsuit-settlement-mental-health-issues)
as a result of doing the moderation. So that may not be viable, meaning that I
don't really have any good solutions to propose.

At least the status quo is somewhat tenable, if not slightly shitty for people
like me (right-wing hate against trans people is allowed to stay up on twitter
but if you're trans and you reply to any of that hate with a "hey can you please
not do this", you're likely to get ~~banned~~ suspended from twitter
indefinitely when people mass-report you for trying to be reasonable).

Maybe Twitter is too big to moderate effectively and something more
decentralized with human moderators you can actually know as people (like you can
with Mastodon) is better. I'm good friends with the person that moderates the
Mastodon server I use and he lets me get away with crazy things like operating a
Waifu Diffusion image generation bot on that Mastodon server. Maybe that won't
scale either because of [the same burnout
issues](https://ashfurrow.com/blog/mastodon-technology-shutdown/). I don't know.
I certainly know that basing it all on something like an immutable blockchain is
about the worst decision we can make though.

I don't have a good conclusion here. I don't have a good suggestion for what
people should do about this situation. I am wholly powerless in the equation
besides taking my ball and going home. I'd really hate to have to do that with
Twitter, but I'm willing to do it if I have to. It really sucks that my job
involves me using Twitter.

I may just pivot a lot of my DevRel stuff over to
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/xe-iaso-87a883254/), but I really hate
that so much of the industry is forced to use LinkedIn because so much of the
industry uses LinkedIn and then you get isolated from connections without it.
