---
title: Untitled Furry Cyberpunk Story
date: 2021-05-23
series: revueBackup
---

The recording continued: “And now take a deep breath in through your nose,
feeling calming and soothing energy flowing through you”. I breathed deeply, the
stench of the local area flooding my mind. It was so foul. The megacorps must
have started another production run at their factories. I felt my lungs fill
entirely and I held my breath, waiting for the tape to catch up.

“Now breathe out through your mouth, and let your troubles go out with it.” I
exhaled, the room getting slightly warmer. The windows fogged slightly and the
signage started to blur, almost as if the glass was frosted. I stretched out my
wings and tail, soaking in the bliss of the moment.

It had been 15 years since the megacorps had dominated every aspect of life. The
oceans had slowly turned acidic, leading me (and the rest of my friends) to
abandon my old beachfront house. The sky was actually blue then, not the sickly
gray/brown/purple that the megacorps had turned it into.

But, this is time to meditate; not time to reminisce. Deep breath in, hold it,
deep breath out, hold it; repeat and repeat. “Well done, you have completed this
meditation synergy enhancement module. Ropjar corporation thanks you for your
patronage. The usual fee will be deducted from your account. Have a good day!” I
always hated that blurb at the end. Even when you paid for things you still got
advertisements to remind you of your true masters. 

I look over to Nicole, she’s splayed out on the couch in a drunken stupor.
Sounds about right, she must have been out partying again; wonder if she still
remembers the day we met in the deep. That day I saved her from that thick kelp
forest. Back when kelp was able to grow in the wild.

I shook her a little by the dorsal fin, earning a loud groaning noise.

Putting on my hoodie, I spoke to her: “Come on, you told me you would go to the
market with me.”

Nicole turned her head towards me and glared with that stare that only sharks
are able to do. She turned her head back and covered herself with a pillow.

“I was going to get some Flopnax for your hangover.” That seemed to get her
attention. She got up, very reluctant to escape from the sweet bliss of her
emotionless sleep.

“Yeah, I’m coming, just let me get dressed.”

She sluggishly puts on a tshirt, hoodie and jeans and is ready to head out with
me, nodding approvingly. We head out and lock the door behind us, once with the
lock from the landlord and another we hoped would actually resist breakins. You
could never really know for sure though.

The market was a quick stroll away. The skyline had long ago been bathed with
neon. It was hard to tell if it was day or night based on the amount of light
pollution. The blackened skies and 24/7 brilliant displays of capitalism had
made sure of that. 

A lizard-child looked up into my eyes on the street and I could see nothing but
hunger and pain. I stopped for a moment and listened to him. “Please, I just
want to eat. Can you help me?” He held up a large metal cup with a few coins in
it. My heart sank. I had stopped carrying money after being mugged last week.
The Rilkef Wrist-Wallet’s electronic payments finally won me over.

“I’m sorry, I don’t have any cash. Do you accept wrist-wallet?” I held up my
wrist with the balance transfer screen showing an offer of $50,000, or just
enough for a meal or two.

The kid’s eyes fell into a kind of despair you don’t normally see. He shook his
head and sulked away sadly. It was hard to watch.

I looked over to Nicole to see her reaction to this, she seemed really split.
“Hey, hey kid!” she said, summoning the lizard kid back over. “Take this, you
really look like you could use it”. She gave the kid a $75,000 coin and the
kid’s eyes lit up like stars.

“Wow! Thanks! I i don’t know what to say! Thank you!” The kid danced down the
street beaming and happy, holding his precious coin like it was a gem.

I hugged Nicole. She hugged back. We kept going to the market. She was a lot
more happy after having done that. The megacorps may have destroyed a lot of our
planet, but they didn’t get our spirit of goodness.

The market was one of the few places in the city that was largely free of the
headache-inducing levels of neon, thank god. Nicole was gone in an instant
towards the medical section. I knew she’d get what we needed, as well as her
hangover cure. I grabbed a few cans of water and headed towards the food.

The oceans had been poisoned by the factories, leading her to have to abandon
her home at Cascadia. It was getting harder and harder to find enough clean
water to sustain marine mammal skin. Universal basic income had helped, but the
constantly rising price had made my favorite kind of bath more and more of a
pipedream. At least there were the community pools, for now.

I got everything on the list and met up with Nicole. “Hey Cadey, look at this!
This thing’ll let us purify some of our rainwater! We could take baths again!”
…Purify? The acid rain? As a consumer product? That sounded preposterous.

“Sure, let’s hope it works”.

Nicole stuck it in the cart and we walked up to the checkout. We didn’t need to
do anything but stick everything into a few bags. The corporations had been
watching with cameras and automatically figured out what we were taking. It
would be a beautiful system if it wasn’t so creepy.

We got notifications that the bill was split between us and started back to
home. The purification kit was slightly too big for a bag, so Nicole was
carrying it by itself.

Our walk home was uneventful. Just more neon, advertisements, and endless chrome
skyscrapers. Walking up to the door, we noticed that someone had tried to break
into the lock. Very badly, but they had tried. With a slight laugh I unlocked
the door and helped Nicole in.

The door was closed and I headed to the kitchen to put things away onto the
shelves. Nicole took the hangover pill and headed out to the balcony to set up
the water system.

I heard her make a little bit of noise as she tried to fit the collection funnel
over a bucket. My watch beeped a weather alert, it was going to rain. I heard
her watch go off too. “Fek!”, Nicole shouted from the deck. She finished setup
and headed indoors.

“Guess we’re gonna see this sucker in action Cadey.” She smiled with that toothy
shark grin as I was throwing together some things in the Femtopot.

The rain started, sickly green burning drops falling towards the earth. It
tinted the neon and made a slight sizzling noise when it hit the ground. The
funnel seemed to be working well enough to avoid getting instantly melted. The
filter also was doing its job passively filtering out the toxins.

The rain turned to a downpour and a crack of thunder could be heard from above.
Nicole turned on the holo-tv and started flipping through channels.

I miss when it was safe to dance outside in the rain. It was one of my favorite
things to do. My clothes would get soaked, but that wasn’t the point of it. The
point of it was to have fun. To just live in the moment and not have to worry
about it.

Seeing as dinner would mostly cook itself from this point, I headed over to my
side of the apartment and laid on my beanbag. It was one of the few things I was
able to save from my beach house. It had seen many years through many previous
owners. The duct tape patches keeping it together showing their age. I slowly
fell asleep, smelling the sweet smell of our chicken soup dinner instead of the
pollution for once.

I woke up to Nicole shaking me awake. “You gotta see this! It’s enough for a
bath!”

What. A bath? Out of the acid rain that melted the trees to slag?

“You sure it’s safe?”

“You can check for yourself with the PH paper if you want, but last I checked it
was around 7.5. I tried tasting it and it’s the real stuff. Pure drinking and
bathing water.”

“I’ll let you go first.”

“Suit yourself~”

She plugged the tub and filled it with water from the barrel. It smelled like my
baths from when I was a teenager. That peaceful smell that comes from the
meeting of the porcelain and the fluoride. I wonder if that’s how it was able to
filter the acid out.

Nicole entered the tub and made one of those happy sighs that I haven’t heard in
a long time. “Cadey! Actual water!” She splashed me and I remembered when we did
that at the beach.

“Can I join you?”

She nodded and made room for me in the tub. I joined her and embraced her. We
laid in there for what felt like hours, hugging, kissing and embracing in our
watery tub.

It was perfect.
